# Faroese-English/English-Faroese Translation Project

This project is aimed at investigating the role of semantic similarity between examples and query in few shot translation performance. 
In order to do so, we perform Faroese-English and English-Faroese translations fo the devtest split of the FLORES dataset using the OpenAI API. Examples based on semantic similarity from the Sprotin parallel dataset.

## Components

The project consists of two main Python scripts:

1. **Pick_examples.py**: This script is used to select few-shot learning examples from a dataset based on semantic similarity. It utilizes the `SentenceTransformer` library for calculating sentence embeddings. 

2. **prompt_similarity_fewshot.py**: This script handles the actual translation task. It constructs prompts for translation by including semantically similar examples and then uses the OpenAI API to perform the translation.

## Setup and Requirements

- Python 3.x
- Libraries: `openai`, `pandas`, `numpy`, `sentence_transformers`
- OpenAI API key

## Usage

1. **Pick_examples.py**: Run this script first to select and prepare few-shot learning examples. It reads sentences from a specified dataset and calculates their embeddings to find the most semantically similar examples. The index of the examples selected for each query is then output in JSON format (output_<n_examples>_<query_language>.json). Choose the number of most similar example, NUMBER_OF_EXAMPLES, as a hyperparameter. Select the QUERY_LANGUAGE = 'Faroese' or 'English'. Example: if you select English, the code will select English examples to compare with the query to calculate semantic similarity. 

2. **prompt_selection_fewshot_confidence.py**: After preparing the examples, use this script to perform the translations. It constructs prompts that include the few-shot examples and communicates with the OpenAI API to obtain translations. You can choose how examples will be selected by setting EXAMPLE_SELECTION_MODE as 'fixed' or 'random'. The former will select examples based on the list of indexes contained in the file INDEX_FILE. The latter will select examples randomly from the EXAMPLE_FILE. 
Translations are exported in JSON format, together with a condifence score generated by GPT-4.

## Configuration

- Set the OpenAI API key in your environment variables.
- Adjust the paths and model names as required in the scripts.


